In this lecture, you'll learn about unique local and link local IPv6 addresses. We'll start off
with unique local.
Those are similar to IPv4 RFC1918 private addresses. So
10.X.X.X, 172.16-172.31.X.X,
and 192.168.X.X,.
The private addresses, they are not publicly reachable.
They are assigned from a range FC00::/7 and as always host should
be assigned /64 addresses.
So that's it for our unique local addresses.
Not so much to tell you about
them. They're pretty simple.
There is more to tell you about
the link local addresses. So link local addresses are valid for communications on their particular
link only. They cannot send traffic out to another link.
They're assigned from the range FE80::10 to
FEB0::10.
And again, as always, hosts should be assigned /64 addresses.
So that might seem a bit confusing for now.
So let's have a look and see what we mean by link local and not being able to send traffic off their
own link.
In the example here in the diagram, we've got routers A, B and C and they're all connected to the same network
segment through
the switch on the left. On that segment, router A has been assigned IP address FE80::1/64
as its link local address on that interface.
Router B is FE80::2 and router C is FE80::3.
There's also another link here as well which is going between B and D. B and D have also got link local
addresses on that link. B is FE80::4 and D is FE80::5.
Now because these are link local addresses,
FE80::1, FE80::2 and FE80::3
on that link between routers A, B and C, they can communicate with each other. And FE80::4 and
FE80::5 on the link between routers B and D,
they can communicate with each other as well.
But FE80::1, FE80::2 and FE80::3 do not have any connectivity
to FE80::4
or FE80::5. So link local addresses,
you can send and receive traffic from them, but it's only valid on that local link.
It will not get routed out another interface on the other side of a router.
So you're maybe thinking, well, why am I ever going to use a link local addresses, if they can only
send traffic on their local link? They can be used for communications, which should not be forwarded
beyond the local link like routing protocol,
Hello packets and updates. And the link local addresses are mandatory on your Cisco router interfaces if IPv6
is enabled on them.
So they're mandatory and local addresses are automatically generated with the EUI-64 addresses
whenever you enable IPv6 on an interface. But that automatically generated EUI-64 address
can be overridden by manually configuring a link local address on there.
So let's see how this works. The example here, we've got a new router, which has got no IPv6 configuration
yet.
So we do a show ipv6 interface brief, and we see that we've got no addresses.
We then configure our global unicast addresses on this
router.
So first off, IPv6 unicast routing to enable IPv6 routing on the router, then on interface fa0/0,
we say IPv6 address 2001:DB8:0:1::1.
So that's a global unicast address.
And we've also put a global unicast address on interface fa2/0.
If we then do a show ipv6 interface brief, I can see on fa0/0.
I've got that global unicast address that I just configured,
2001:DB8:0:1::1.
And the router has also automatically generated a link local address on that interface as well.
It's given it the IPv6 link local address, FE80:C801:2FFF:FE24:0.
And also on interface fa2/0, because we configured
a global unicast address on there, the router has also automatically configured a link local address on there.
You can easily see which are the link local addresses because we begin with FE80. Notice on interface
fa1/0 and fa3/0,
there is no link local address on there because IPv6 was not enabled on those interfaces yet.
The local addresses are valid only in local link as we covered before, so you can use the same
address on multiple interfaces because it's unique at the interface level.
It doesn't create a conflict if you use the same address on a different interface.
So you can see that right here on R1, we've got IPv6 address FE80::1 link local
on fa0/0 and we've also configured it on fa2/0 as well.
You can also see here how to configure the link local address manually.
If you do this, it will override having the EUI-64 address.
So this can be useful if you want to have a more logical fix,
the link local address on your router.
Now, let's talk about multiple addresses on our interfaces. It's different in IPv4 than it
is in IPv6.
You see in our example here, we've gone on to R1. On interface fa0/0,
I've said IP address 10.10.10.10.1.
It's a /24.
And then I hit enter and then I configure IP address 192.168.10.1/24.
Well, if you now do a show run, you can see that the IP address on the interface is
192.168.10.1.
When we entered the second IP address, it wrote over the first IP address.
So if you configure multiple IPv4 address commands on a router, it's the latest one that will take
effect. The older ones will be removed.
If you do want to have multiple IPv4 addresses on an interface and the  router, the way you do that is you can
see down at the bottom. Interface fa0/0, IP address 172.16.0.1/24.
And then I use the secondary keyword. That will allow you to have two IPv4 addresses on an interface.
But the maximum that you can have is two.
If you do configure this, then you see the example here.
We've got IP address 192.168.10.1 is the primary and 172.16.0.1
is the secondary.
Whenever you send traffic from the router itself and it's sourced from that interface, it will use the primary
IP address.
It's not normal to configure secondary IPv4 addresses.
This is very rarely done.
OK, so that's how it works in IPv4.
You can have a maximum of two IP addresses on an interface and to do that, you have to use a secondary
keyword.
It's different in IPv6. In IPv6, you can have multiple IPv6 addresses on the same interface
on a router and it's quite happy for you to do that.
To see an example, here we've got an interface fa0/0.
I've got IPv6 address FE80::1 and I say that's the link local address. Then IPv6
address 2001:DB8:0:0::1 and IPv6 address
2001:DB8:0:1::1.
And if this was an IPv4, the second one would have overwritten the first one.
But in IPv6, we do a show run interface fa0/0f and I can see that all of my IP addresses
are on there.
So I've got IPv6 address FE80::1 link local and I've also got the
2001:DB8::1 and the 2001:DB8:0:1::1.
So you can see it will take multiple IP addresses.
You can also see from the example here as well that on that same interface, I've also got my IPv4
addresses on there too.
So that will work just fine.
This is a dual stack router, meaning that it's running both IPv4 and IPv6.
If a packet comes into the router, which has got an IPv4 destination address, it will use its IPv4
routing.
If a packet comes in with an IPv6 destination address, then it will use its IPv6 routing. Whether it's
going to be IPv4 or IPv6,
depends on the application on the end host that's sending traffic through the router.
OK, so to summarize our multiple IPv6 addresses, link local addresses, are mandator on IPv6
enabled interfaces. Global unicast and unique local addresses are optional.
You can have multiple addresses on the same interface and one link local address for routing protocol
traffic and one global unicast address for normal routing is typical on your routers.
OK, so that was our other types of addresses.
In the next lecture, we'll take a look at this with a lab demo.